Improve VPS hosting guide, add Hostinger to the hosting comparison (#781)
grammyjs/website: site/docs/hosting/vps.md

A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having the full control of its system.

> ## Server Rental

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Server Rental

> You need to rent a VPS in order to follow this guide.
> This first section will explain how to do that.
> If you already have a VPS to work on, skip [down](#starting-the-bot).
```

   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.
   We will set up SSH keys [later](#ssh-keys).

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol for remote control of a computer (server) and file transfer.

```sh:no-line-numbers
ssh root@<ip-address>
```

replacing `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, which you can find on the server management page.

:::tip Separate User for Each Application
In this guide, all actions with the server will be performed as the root user.
This is done on purpose to simplify the material.
However, in reality, the root user should only be responsible for general services (web server, database, etc.), and applications should be run by individual non-root users.
This approach ensures the security of confidential data and prevents hacking of the entire system.
At the same time, it imposes some inconveniences.
Describing all these points unnecessarily increases the complexity of the article, which we try to avoid.
:::

## Starting the Bot

We now have a server at our disposal where we can run the bot to keep it running around the clock.

> > To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).

Reviewer: Should we leave a quick note how to get the files to the server using `scp`?
```suggestion
> To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).
>
> For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:
>
> ```sh:no-line-numbers
> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>
> ```
>
> replacing `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.
```

@KnorpelSenf like this?

Reviewer: Yep!

:::tip Don't forget to install the runtime!
To run the bot, you need to install Node.js or Deno on the server, depending on the runtime in which the bot will run.

> This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to do it yourself. :wink:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to do it yourself.
You probably already did this when [getting started](../guide/getting-started.md), so you should be familiar with the steps. :wink:
```

:::

Below are two ways you can keep your bot running smoothly.

> ### systemd

Reviewer: You need to add another `#` to the subsections now.

A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having the full control of its system.

## Server Rental

> You need to rent a VPS in order to follow this guide.
> This first section will explain how to do that.
> If you already have a VPS to work on, skip [down](#starting-the-bot).

> We chose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com/) as our host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We choose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com) as our host.
```

> We chose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com/) as our host.

Reviewer: I see no difference

::: warning Change the rental term!
The typical lease term is 2 years (a marketing ploy), and it costs a lot of money.
You probably don't need it, so you can start by renting a server for a month, which is much cheaper.

In any case, Hostinger provides a 30-day money-back guarantee.
:::

After payment you will be able to set up your server:

1. **Location.**
   We recommend that you choose the location closest to Amsterdam.
   It is in Amsterdam that the Telegram server is located, which is responsible for ensuring the operation of bots.
   If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it.
2. **Server type.**
   Choose the option "Clean OS".
3. **Operating system.**
   We will use Ubuntu 22.04.
   If you choose a different system, some steps may be different, so be careful.
4. **Server name.**
5. **Root password.**
   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.
   We will set up SSH keys [later](#ssh-keys).

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol for remote control of a computer (server) and file transfer.

```sh
ssh root@<ip-address>
```

> replacing `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, which you can find on the server management page.

Reviewer 2: If we write this as a new sentence, should we make this note less prominent by adding a '>' in front?

> replacing `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, which you can find on the server management page.

Reviewer: Yep, why not

> ::: tip Separate User for Each Application

Reviewer 2: In text blocks, you often don't add a blank line. For example, guide/api.md line 21 or guide/commands.md line 27. And there are many such places.

> ::: tip Separate User for Each Application

Reviewer: See #870

In this guide, all actions with the server will be performed as the root user.
This is done on purpose to simplify the material.
However, in reality, the root user should only be responsible for general services (web server, database, etc.), and applications should be run by individual non-root users.
This approach ensures the security of confidential data and prevents hacking of the entire system.
At the same time, it imposes some inconveniences.
Describing all these points unnecessarily increases the complexity of the article, which we try to avoid.
:::

## Starting the Bot

We now have a server at our disposal where we can run the bot to keep it running around the clock.

> To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).
>
> For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:
>
> ```sh

> > scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Reviewer 2: We can leave a note about this, as it is not relevant to the topic of the article.

> ```
>
> replacing `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.

:::tip Don't forget to install the runtime!
To run the bot, you need to install Node.js or Deno on the server, depending on the runtime in which the bot will run.
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to do it yourself.

> You probably already did this when [getting started](../guide/getting-started.md), so you should be familiar with the steps. :wink:

Reviewer: This emoji does not render properly

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by that? It will be displayed for me

Reviewer: Can you post a screenshot?

Reviewer 2: ![Screenshot from 2023-07-11 07-50-33](https://github.com/grammyjs/website/assets/75927667/a4511c6d-4c39-478b-8589-fdb20992ffdb)

Reviewer 3: ![image](https://github.com/grammyjs/website/assets/74030149/9dabcf8c-644c-47d8-98f5-1eaf9131c716)

Reviewer: Right, it's using the system fonts. This will surely be fixed by Vitepress at some point.

:::

> Below are two ways you can keep your bot running smoothly.

Reviewer: Please add two links with anchors so people can skip to the two respective ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below are two ways you can keep your bot running smoothly: using [systemd](#systemd) or [pm2](#pm2).
```

Reviewer: Yep!

### systemd

systemd is a powerful service manager which is pre-installed on many Linux distributions, mainly Debian-based ones.

#### Getting the Start Command

1. Get the full path of your runtime:

::: code-group

```sh [Deno]
which deno
```

```sh [Node.js]
which node
```

> :::

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be indented in order to be part of the list entry? Currently, it interrupts the list.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense (even Markdownlint complains about it). But then you lose the syntax highlighting in the code editor, which I don't like. I discussed this with Roj here https://t.me/c/1322374388/4249

Reviewer: I'm aware, see https://t.me/c/1322374388/4265?thread=4249

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be better to apply this change in this PR, since it is the same `ol-prefix` rule.
Then it will have to be changed here as well.

Reviewer: Sure, go ahead

Reviewer 2: done

A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having the full control of its system.

## Server Rental

> You need to rent a VPS in order to follow this guide.
> This first section will explain how to do that.
> If you already have a VPS to work on, skip [down](#starting-the-bot).

> We chose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com/) as our host.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We chose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com) as our host.
```

There are several reasons for this:

1. It is multilingual, so you will find it convenient and easy to use.
2. It has a very rich documentation that thoroughly covers all the problem areas that a beginner may encounter.
3. It offers powerful servers at fairly low prices.

> You are free to choose the provider of your choice.
> All providers provide the same services, so you won't have any problems with the technical part of this article.
> You can take this part as an overview of how the server rental operation works.
> If you are a beginner, you can use this guide to rent your first ever server!

:::tip Analog of a server
If you cannot or do not want to rent a server but you still want to play around with running a bot on a VPS, you can follow this tutorial on a virtual machine instead.

> To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org).
```

Create a virtual machine with the desired Linux distribution and use it as a real server.

> :::

Reviewer: To be honest, I see no reason why this would be helpful to anyone. A VM running on a local machine cannot be used for hosting, so people must rent a server anyway. VMs are useful if you rent bare metal in a time before Docker was invented. I do not think our readers fall into that category.

I suggest to remove this tip entirely.

Reviewer 2: And what if a person needs to gain experience in deploying to a remote server, but cannot rent it? Then a virtual machine will do the trick.

Reviewer: Then we should mention that:
```suggestion
:::tip Analog of a server
If you cannot or do not want to rent a server but you still want to play around with running a bot on a VPS, you can follow this tutorial on a virtual machine instead.
To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org/).
Create a virtual machine with the desired Linux distribution and use it as a real server.
:::
```

:::

After payment, you will be able to set up your server:

1. **Location.**
   We recommend that you choose the location closest to Amsterdam.
   It is in Amsterdam that the Telegram server is located, which is responsible for ensuring the operation of bots.
   If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it.
2. **Server type.**
   Choose the option "Clean OS".
3. **Operating system.**
   We will use Ubuntu 22.04.
   If you choose a different system, some steps may be different, so be careful.
4. **Server name.**
5. **Root password.**
   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.
   We will set up SSH keys [later](#ssh-keys).

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol for remote control of a computer (server) and file transfer.

```sh
ssh root@<ip-address>
```

> Replace `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, which you can find on the server management page.

::: tip Configuring SSH
It can be difficult and tedious to remember which IP address and whose name you need to connect to a server.

> To eliminate these routine steps and improve your server experience, you can configure SSH by creating a `~/.ssh/config` (<https://linuxhandbook.com/ssh-config-file/>) file on your computer that stores all the data you need to connect to the server under certain arbitrary identifiers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To eliminate these routine steps and improve your server experience, you can configure SSH by creating a `~/.ssh/config` (<https://linuxhandbook.com/ssh-config-file>) file on your computer that stores all the data you need to connect to the server under certain arbitrary identifiers.
```

A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having the full control of its system.

## Preparing Your Code

> To get started, you can use the bot shown in the [example of using a session](../plugins/session.md#example-usage).

Reviewer: Why this example? That makes little sense to me. We might as well use the one on `/`?

Reviewer: Why do you need a complex example, though? There's a lot of interesting content here already, so it seems like the natural thing to do is to reduce the complexity of the bot itself as much as possible

Reviewer 2: Initially, I wanted to use a full-fledged control panel, but due to @deptyped's comments, I decided to abandon this idea because otherwise the article would be very long and contain a lot of unnecessary material, and the panel itself would entail many unnecessary modules that are unnecessary for the user.

Reviewer: I agree with @deptyped, it makes sense to stay focused in such guides. We should explain how to host a bot on a VPS, and only that. Consequently, it would make sense to use a primitive hello world bot here.

> In the following, we will assume that the bot runs on Node.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, we will assume that the bot runs on Node.js.
```

Why only Node.js and not Deno or is it better for both runtimes?
The answer is simple: the Deno pipeline would be very simple.
A Node.js pipeline is complicated by the additional task of building and setting up communication between the two tasks.

> So a CI/CD pipeline for Node.js would be a better example.

Reviewer: This logic is gold, but we're also making it easier to use Node now because there are no Deno docs. If it's so simple, couldn't we just provide both tutorials?

Reviewer: We can do it the same way we do it in the getting started guide

## Server Rental

We chose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com/) as our host.
There are several reasons for this:

1. It is multilingual, so you will find it convenient and easy to use.
2. It has a very rich documentation that thoroughly covers all the problem areas that a beginner may encounter.

> 3. It offers powerful servers at fairly low prices.

Reviewer: How about telling users instead that they can pick whichever hosting provider they like? What they need to know is how to host on a VPS, and we should like to our [comparison](https://grammy.dev/hosting/comparison.html#vps). I don't see why we need to push them in one direction or the other.

Naturally, we can still guide them through the process for this one hosting provider in particular. So if they really don't know what to do, we can at least give them some guidance.

Also, what about proximity to Amsterdam?

Reviewer 2: From the point of view of the article's user, I would have been happier if the article contained a guide from the actual server lease to CI/CD. This would be useful at least from an overview point of view of how the server lease stage works. If I need to deal with server lease separately, then why do I need this guide? I can deal with server leasing separately, and with systemd/pm2 and CI/CD separately. But we provide the minimum knowledge necessary for bots.

Instead, we could simply leave a note that the user can choose any provider, and the relevant part of the article serves only as an overview.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "proximity to Amsterdam"?

If this refers to the location of the server, I don't think it plays any role for bots, because the user cannot know in advance which Telegram server will serve his bot.

The same goes for the API's own telegram servers. Although in this case, it is logical to place them, if not on the same server, then at least in the same geographical area.

Reviewer: Most people use the Bot API server hosted by Telegram, which is in Amsterdam only.

Reviewer 2: > Most people use the Bot API server hosted by Telegram, which is in Amsterdam only.

Huh, that's interesting. I didn't know that fact. Then it's really worth adding a recommendation.

Reviewer: I still find this advertisement a little peculiar. It sounds like we are affiliated with them.

Reviewer 2: What exactly do you not like? Should I completely remove the description of these benefits?

Reviewer: IMO yes. If you want to compare it, try being less biased (list both pros and cons). But in the end, I already don't see why we need to advertise the service at all. We use it in this tutorial and that's it, the user has no choice but to read it.

We already say that they can use any service. We also have a comparison table that we link to.

:::tip Analog of a server
If you cannot or do not want to rent a server, you can replace it with a virtual machine.

> To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox] (https://virtualbox.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org/).
```

The resources of VPS 1 are enough for bots with a small audience, and even more so for our test bot.

Go back to the "VPS 1" card and click the "Add" button.
You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger.

:::warning Change the rental term!
The typical lease term is 2 years (a marketing ploy), and it costs a lot of money.
You probably don't need it, so you can start by renting a server for a month, which is much cheaper.

In any case, Hostinger provides a 30-day money-back guarantee.
:::

After payment you will be able to set up your server:

1. **Location.**
2. **Server type.**
   Choose the option "Clean OS".
3. **Operating system.**
   We will use Ubuntu 22.04.
   If you choose a different system, some steps may be different, so be careful.
4. **Server name.**
5. **Root password.**
   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol for remote control of a computer (server) and file transfer.

```sh:no-line-numbers

> ssh root@<ip-address>

Reviewer: Should we tell them not to work with the root user?

Reviewer 2: We can leave a note about it. The problem with denying root user is the subsequent configuration of allowing `sudo systemctl restart <service-name>` without having to enter a password during CI/CD. This adds unnecessary complexity to the article, and there is little benefit, because it is unlikely that the user of the article will write corporate bots for which it will be necessary to think about security (this is just my opinion). Otherwise, a separate professional will be responsible for deploying the bot, or the bot developer will study security issues on his own.

Reviewer: Fair point. Lets add a note that this would be good to do, but it extends the scope of the article, so people should research it on their own

You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger.

::: warning Change the Rental Term!
The typical lease term is 2 years (a marketing ploy), and it costs a lot of money.
You probably don't need it, so you can start by renting a server for a month, which is much cheaper.

In any case, Hostinger provides a 30-day money-back guarantee.
:::

After payment, you will be able to set up your server:

1. **Location.**
   We recommend that you choose the location closest to Amsterdam.
   It is in Amsterdam that the Telegram server is located, which is responsible for ensuring the operation of bots.
   If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it instead.
2. **Server type.**
   Choose the option "Clean OS".
3. **Operating system.**
   We will use Ubuntu 22.04.
   If you choose a different system, some steps may be different, so be careful.
4. **Server name.**
5. **Root password.**
   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.
   We will set up SSH keys [later](#ssh-keys).

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> > SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol for remote control of a computer (server) and file transfer.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol that can be used to remotely control a computer.
```

```sh
ssh root@<ip-address>
```

> > Replace `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, which you can find on the server management page.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> Replace `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server which you can find in the server management page.
```

Reviewer: On the page, not in the page

Reviewer 5: Fixed.

::: tip Configuring SSH
It can be difficult and tedious to remember which IP address and whose name you need to connect to a server.
To eliminate these routine steps and improve your server experience, you can configure SSH by creating a `~/.ssh/config` (<https://linuxhandbook.com/ssh-config-file>) file on your computer that stores all the data you need to connect to the server under certain arbitrary identifiers.

> This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to configure it yourself.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you'll have to configure it yourself.
```

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having the full control of its system.

Reviewer: Unrelated to your changes, but while we're at it …
```suggestion
A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over the system.
```

## Server Rental

> You need to rent a VPS in order to follow this guide.
> This first section will explain how to do that.
> If you already have a VPS to work on, skip [down](#starting-the-bot).

We choose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com) as our host.

> You are free to choose the provider of your choice.
> All providers provide the same services, so you won't have any problems with the technical part of this article.
> You can take this part as an overview of how the server rental operation works.
> If you are a beginner, you can use this guide to rent your first ever server!

> ::: tip Analog of a server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: tip Analog of a Server
```

If you cannot or do not want to rent a server but you still want to play around with running a bot on a VPS, you can follow this tutorial on a virtual machine instead.
To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org).
Create a virtual machine with the desired Linux distribution and use it as a real server.
:::

Go to the [VPS tariff catalog](https://hostinger.com/vps-hosting).
We will use the "VPS 1" plan.
Below, you can see a comparison table that describes the offered server resources and limits.
The resources of VPS 1 are enough for bots with a small audience, and even more so for our test bot.

Go back to the "VPS 1" card and click the "Add" button.
You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger.

> ::: warning Change the rental term!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: warning Change the Rental Term!
```

The typical lease term is 2 years (a marketing ploy), and it costs a lot of money.
You probably don't need it, so you can start by renting a server for a month, which is much cheaper.

In any case, Hostinger provides a 30-day money-back guarantee.
:::

After payment, you will be able to set up your server:

1. **Location.**
   We recommend that you choose the location closest to Amsterdam.
   It is in Amsterdam that the Telegram server is located, which is responsible for ensuring the operation of bots.

>    If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it instead.
```
makes is clear that it = the Bot API server

2. **Server type.**

>    Choose the option "Clean OS".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Choose the option "Clean OS."
```
is technically the right way to do it in English, even though I don't like this. @roj1512?

Reviewer 5: I think like that, too.

![image](https://github.com/grammyjs/website/assets/49933115/8fe06a3b-7327-4615-8dec-f5a474f02069)

Reviewer: Apple is using `""`? Blasphemy.

Reviewer 5: Yes, I also thought that. Perhaps they were lazy.

To eliminate these routine steps and improve your server experience, you can configure SSH by creating a `~/.ssh/config` (<https://linuxhandbook.com/ssh-config-file>) file on your computer that stores all the data you need to connect to the server under certain arbitrary identifiers.
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to configure it yourself.
:::

::: tip Separate User for Each Application
In this guide, all actions with the server will be performed as the root user.
This is done on purpose to simplify the material.
However, in reality, the root user should only be responsible for general services (web server, database, etc.), and applications should be run by individual non-root users.
This approach ensures the security of confidential data and prevents hacking of the entire system.
At the same time, it imposes some inconveniences.
Describing all these points unnecessarily increases the complexity of the article, which we try to avoid.
:::

## Starting the Bot

We now have a server at our disposal where we can run the bot to keep it running around the clock.

> > To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).
> >
> > For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:
> >
> > ```sh
> > scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>
> > ```
> >
> > Replace `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.

Reviewer: What do you think of just making this a normal paragraph? :)
```suggestion
To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).

For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:

```sh
scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>
[REMOVE THIS]```

Replace `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).

For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:

```sh
scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>
```

> Replace `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.
```

# Hosting: VPS

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over the system.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.
```

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.

Reviewer 5: I’m not exactly sure about this one.

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.

Reviewer: I wanted to avoid confusion around users being able to access the VPS. It's about the developers using the VPS, not the users using the bot.

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.

Reviewer: Maybe this?
```suggestion
A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with you, the developer, having full control over the system.
```

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.

Reviewer 5: Yes, but _its developers_ means the VM’s developers, not the developers that use it.

> A virtual private server, mostly known as VPS, is a virtual machine running in the cloud with its users having full control over its system.

Reviewer: What about the second suggestion then?

## Server Rental

> > You need to rent a VPS in order to follow this guide.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> To be able to follow this guide, you first need to rent a VPS.
```

> This first section will explain how to do that.

> > If you already have a VPS to work on, skip [down](#starting-the-bot).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> If you already have a VPS to work on, skip to the [next section](#starting-the-bot).
```

We choose [Hostinger](https://hostinger.com) as our host.

> You are free to choose the provider of your choice.
> All providers provide the same services, so you won't have any problems with the technical part of this article.
> You can take this part as an overview of how the server rental operation works.
> If you are a beginner, you can use this guide to rent your first ever server!

::: tip Analog of a Server
If you cannot or do not want to rent a server but you still want to play around with running a bot on a VPS, you can follow this tutorial on a virtual machine instead.
To do this, use an application such as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org).

> Create a virtual machine with the desired Linux distribution and use it as a real server.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Create a virtual machine with the desired Linux distribution to simulate a Linux server.
```

:::

> Go to the [VPS tariff catalog](https://hostinger.com/vps-hosting).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Go to the [VPS Hosting page](https://hostinger.com/vps-hosting).
```

We will use the "KVM 1" plan.
The resources of "KVM 1" are enough for bots with a large audience, and even more so for our test bot.

> Go back to the "KVM 1" card and click the "Add to cart" button.

Author: ```suggestion
Click the "Add to cart" button.
```

I missed the point when I deleted the paragraph about the comparison table. Now this line is not relevant.

You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger.

::: warning Change the Rental Term!
The typical lease term is 1 year (a marketing ploy), and it costs a lot of money.
You probably don't need it, so you can start by renting a server for a month, which is much cheaper.

In any case, Hostinger provides a 30-day money-back guarantee.
:::

> After payment, you will be able to set up your server:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After making your payment, you will be able to set up your server:
```

1. **Location.**
   We recommend that you choose the location closest to Amsterdam.

>    It is in Amsterdam that the Telegram server is located, which is responsible for ensuring the operation of bots.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   This is because that the main Bot API server is located there.
```

>    If you use your own Bot API server, choose the location closest to it instead.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   If you use your own Bot API server, choose the closest location to it instead.
```

   If you choose a different system, some steps may be different, so be careful.
4. **Server name.**
5. **Root password.**
   Make a strong password and keep it in a safe place!
6. **SSH key**.
   Skip this step.
   We will set up SSH keys [later](#ssh-keys).

After the server is created, you can connect to it using SSH:

> SSH (_Secure Shell_) is a network protocol that can be used to remotely control a computer.

```sh
ssh root@<ip-address>
```

> Replace `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server which you can find on the server management page.

::: tip Configuring SSH
It can be difficult and tedious to remember which IP address and whose name you need to connect to a server.
To eliminate these routine steps and improve your server experience, you can configure SSH by creating a `~/.ssh/config` (<https://linuxhandbook.com/ssh-config-file>) file on your computer that stores all the data you need to connect to the server under certain arbitrary identifiers.
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you'll have to configure it yourself.
:::

::: tip Separate User for Each Application
In this guide, all actions with the server will be performed as the root user.

> This is done on purpose to simplify the material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done on purpose to simplify this guide.
```

However, in reality, the root user should only be responsible for general services (web server, database, etc.), and applications should be run by individual non-root users.
This approach ensures the security of confidential data and prevents hacking of the entire system.
At the same time, it imposes some inconveniences.
Describing all these points unnecessarily increases the complexity of the article, which we try to avoid.
:::

## Starting the Bot

We now have a server at our disposal where we can run the bot to keep it running around the clock.

To simplify the beginning of the article, we skipped the step of delivering the code to the server automatically each time after pushing your code, but it is described [below](#ci-cd).

For now, you can copy local files to a remote server using the following command:

```sh

> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Author: Oh, that's really important. I think that yes, we should leave a note about the recursion key, and that the user just needs to specify the root directory of the project.

> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Reviewer: Nice, do you want to do it?

> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Author: Can you please do that while you're here? I won't be at the computer until tonight.

> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Reviewer: Sure

> scp <path-to-local-files> root@<ip-address>:<path-to-remote-directory>

Reviewer: Done

```

> > Replace `<path-to-local-files>` with the path to local files, `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server, and `<path-to-remote-directory>` with the path to the directory where the bot's source code should be stored on the server.

Reviewer: Please remove the \ after applying the suggestion. I just added it so that GH doesn't mess up which parts are included :)

:::tip Don't forget to install the runtime!
To run the bot, you need to install Node.js or Deno on the server, depending on the runtime in which the bot will run.
This is beyond the scope of this article, so you will need to do it yourself.

> You probably already did this when [getting started](../guide/getting-started.md), so you should be familiar with the steps. :wink:

Author: ```suggestion
You probably already did this when [getting started](../guide/getting-started), so you should be familiar with the steps. :wink:
```

:::

Below are two ways you can keep your bot running smoothly: using [systemd](#systemd) or [PM2](#pm2).

### systemd

systemd is a powerful service manager which is pre-installed on many Linux distributions, mainly Debian-based ones.

#### Getting the Start Command

> 1. Get the full path of your runtime:

Author: Yes, it's better to change it

> 1. Get the full path of your runtime:

Reviewer: Done

   ::: code-group

   ```sh [Deno]
   which deno
   ```

   ```sh [Node.js]
   which node
   ```

   :::

> 2. You should have the full path of your entry file, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. You should have the full path to your entry file, too.
```

2. Open your new service file with an editor:

```sh
nano <app-name>.service
```

replacing `<app-name>` with any identifier.

> `<app-name>.service` will be the name of your service.

3. Add the following content:

```text
[Unit]
After=network.target

[Service]
Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>
Type=simple
User=<username>
ExecStart=<start-command>
Restart=on-failure

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target

> ```

Reviewer 2: Should we add an explanation of this configuration?

Reviewer: Hmmm yes, good idea

replacing `<token>` with your bot's token, `<launch-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command), and `<username>` with the name of the user on whose behalf the app is being started.

> > For more information on the unit files, visit [here](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/configuring_basic_system_settings/assembly_working-with-systemd-unit-files_configuring-basic-system-settings).

Reviewer: Got nothing to do with your changes, but would still be nice.
```suggestion
> For more information on the unit files, read [this](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/configuring_basic_system_settings/assembly_working-with-systemd-unit-files_configuring-basic-system-settings).
```

4. Reload systemd whenever you edit the service:

```sh:no-line-numbers
systemctl daemon-reload
```

### Managing the Service

```sh:no-line-numbers
# Replace `<service-name>` with the file name of the service you created.

# To start the service
systemctl start <service-name>

# To view the service logs
systemctl status <service-name>

# To restart the service
systemctl restart <service-name>

# To stop the service
systemctl stop <service-name>

# To enable the service to start when the server boots
systemctl enable <service-name>

# To disable service startup when the server boots
systemctl disable <service-name>
```

### PM2

[PM2](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/) is a daemon process manager for Node.js that will help you manage and keep your app online 24/7.

> PM2 is designed specifically to run applications written in Node.js.
> However, it can also be used to run applications written in other languages or for other frameworks.

### Installing

```sh
npm install pm2@latest -g

# If using Yarn

> yarn global add pm2

Reviewer: Consider using a code environment if you want to branch out for different package managers.

Reviewer 2: I did not change this part in any way. It is identical to the previous version of the article.

Reviewer: That's alright, but while we're at it, why not improve it? :)

Reviewer 2: Yes, we can improve it. However, I need to understand what you mean by "code environment"?

Reviewer 2: This is called a "code group"

Reviewer 2: Even the corresponding html tag is called that

Reviewer 2: Should we add a command for pnpm as well, as is done in [other manuals](https://grammy.dev/guide/getting-started.html)?

Reviewer: Yep!

#### Managing the Application

Below are the commands you can use to control the application.

```sh:no-line-numbers
# If the `ecosystem.config.js` file is in the current directory,
# you can specify nothing to start the application.
# If the application is already running, this command will restart it.
pm2 start

# All of the following commands require you to specify the name of the application
# or the `ecosystem.config.js` file.
# To apply the action to all applications, specify `all`.

# To restart the app
pm2 restart <<app-name>>

# To reload the app
pm2 reload <<app-name>>

# To stop the app
pm2 stop <<app-name>>

# To delete an app
pm2 delete <<app-name>>
```

#### Saving the Application Operation

If the server reboots, your bot will not resume working.
For the bot to resume work, you need to prepare PM2 for this.

On the server in the terminal, run the following command:

```sh:no-line-numbers
pm2 startup
```

You will be provided with a command that you must execute to make PM2 automatically start after the server reboots.

> Після цього виконайте ще одну команду:

Reviewer: Missing translation

```sh:no-line-numbers
pm2 save
```

This command will save the list of current applications so that they can be launched after a server reboot.

If you have created a new application and want to save it as well, simply run `pm2 save` again.

## Running the Bot on Webhooks

To run a bot on webhooks, you will need to use a web framework and not call `bot.start()`.

Here's a sample code to start the bot using `fastify`, which you should add to the bot's main file:

```ts
import { webhookCallback } from "grammy";
import { fastify } from "fastify";

const server = fastify();

server.post(`/${bot.token}`, webhookCallback(bot, "fastify"));

server.listen();

> ```

Reviewer 2: Do you have an example of setting up a webhook using `node:http`? I think it would be better to use native modules instead of dependencies, but I'm too lazy to figure it out myself. I'll take the example for Deno from [here](https://grammy.dev/hosting/deno-deploy.html#preparing-your-code)

Before your domain can work with your VPS, you need to point the domain to your server.
To do this, in the [Hostinger Control Panel](https://hpanel.hostinger.com/), click the "Manage" button next to your domain.
Next, go to the DNS record management page by clicking on the "DNS / Name Servers" button in the menu on the left.

> First, find out the IP address of your VPS.

In the list of DNS records, find the record of type `A` with the name `@`.
Edit this record by changing the IP address in the "Points to" field to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

Next, find and delete the record of type `CNAME` with the name `www`.
Instead, create a new record of type `A` with the name `www`, pointing to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

> In the event of a difficulty, use the other method described in [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).

### Setting up a Web Server

For the website to work and the bot to start receiving updates from Telegram, you need to set up a web server.
We will use [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/).

Caddy is a powerful open source web server with automatic HTTPS.

> It is written in Go, so it is very fast. :zap:

Reviewer: That's not how it works, this is simplifying things too much. Let's not spread false information :)

Reviewer 2: Haha, okay. Should I remove this sentence?

2. Open your new service file with an editor:

```sh
nano <app-name>.service
```

replacing `<app-name>` with any identifier.

> `<app-name>.service` will be the name of your service.

3. Add the following content:

```text
[Unit]
After=network.target

[Service]
Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>
ExecStart=<start-command>
Restart=on-failure

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

replacing `<token>` with your bot's token, `<launch-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command), and `<username>` with the name of the user on whose behalf the app is being started.

A small explanation of the service configuration:

- `After=network.target` - indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.
- `Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>` - sets the environment variable.
  Add new `Environment` if you need multiple environment variables.
- `ExecStart=<start-command>` - sets the startup command.
- `Restart=on-failure` - indicates that the application should restart after a crash.
- `WantedBy=multi-user.target` - defines the system state in which the service should be launched.

>   `multi-user.target` - is a typical value for servers that defines the state of the system when everything works except the graphical interface, which simply does not exist.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is correct, because I'm not very good with systemd

Reviewer: I don't know, either, so let's just leave it like that until someone complains.

pm2 delete <<app-name>>
```

#### Saving the Application Operation

If the server reboots, your bot will not resume working.
For the bot to resume work, you need to prepare PM2 for this.

On the server in the terminal, run the following command:

```sh:no-line-numbers
pm2 startup
```

You will be provided with a command that you must execute to make PM2 automatically start after the server reboots.

Then run one more command:

```sh:no-line-numbers
pm2 save
```

This command will save the list of current applications so that they can be launched after a server reboot.

If you have created a new application and want to save it as well, simply run `pm2 save` again.

## Running the Bot on Webhooks

To run a bot on webhooks, you will need to use a web framework and not call `bot.start()`.

Here is a sample code to run the bot on webhooks that should be added to the main bot file:

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="Node.js" active>

```ts
import { webhookCallback } from "grammy";
import { fastify } from "fastify";

const server = fastify();

server.post(`/${bot.token}`, webhookCallback(bot, "fastify"));

server.listen();
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts

> import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std@0.178.0/http/server.ts";
> import { webhookCallback } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy@v1.14.1/mod.ts";

Reviewer: These URLs are already outdated. The website will always automatically display the latest versions if we use the generic links here.
```suggestion
import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std/http/server.ts";
import { webhookCallback } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
```

const handleUpdate = webhookCallback(bot, "std/http");

serve(async (req) => {
  if (req.method === "POST") {
    const url = new URL(req.url);
    if (url.pathname.slice(1) === bot.token) {
      try {
        return await handleUpdate(req);
      } catch (err) {
        console.error(err);
      }
    }
  }
  return new Response();
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
</CodeGroup>

### Domain Rental

> To connect a bot running on webhooks to the outside world, you need to purchase a domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect a bot running on webhooks to the outside world, you need to purchase a domain.
We are going to explain this with Hostinger again, but there are many other services, too, and they all work similarly.
```

In the text input field, enter a domain name of the form `<name>.<zone>`.
For example, `example.com`.

If the desired domain is free, click the Add button next to it.
You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger if you are not already registered.
Pay for the domain.

#### Domain Pointing to VPS

Before your domain can work with your VPS, you need to point the domain to your server.
To do this, in the [Hostinger Control Panel](https://hpanel.hostinger.com/), click the "Manage" button next to your domain.
Next, go to the DNS record management page by clicking on the "DNS / Name Servers" button in the menu on the left.

> First, find out the IP address of your VPS.

In the list of DNS records, find the record of type `A` with the name `@`.
Edit this record by changing the IP address in the "Points to" field to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

Next, find and delete the record of type `CNAME` with the name `www`.
Instead, create a new record of type `A` with the name `www`, pointing to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

> > In the event of a difficulty, use the other method described in [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you run into problems, use the other method described in [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).
```

To prevent this from happening, we recommend installing a self-hosted runner on your computer so that tasks run on your computer.
This way, you'll get rid of the limits and be able to run pipelines of any complexity and capacity (almost).
:::

### SSH Keys

To deliver files to the server, you need to set up passwordless authentication, which is implemented using SSH keys.

The following commands should be run on your personal computer.

Change to the directory with the SSH keys:

```sh:no-line-numbers
cd ~/.ssh
```

Generate a new key pair:

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="GitHub" active>

```sh:no-line-numbers
ssh-keygen -t rsa -m PEM
```

</CodeGroupItem>
  <CodeGroupItem title="GitLab">

```sh:no-line-numbers
ssh-keygen -t ed25519
```

</CodeGroupItem>
</CodeGroup>

This command will generate a public and private key of the type and format you want for GitHub and GitLab.
You can also specify a custom key name if you wish.
Note that you should skip the fingerprint generation step (just press `Enter`).

Next, send the **public** key to the server:

```sh:no-line-numbers
ssh-copy-id -i <key-name>.pub root@<ip-address>
```

> replacing `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.
```

Reviewer 2: Why did you decide to write this way? I write like this everywhere else. Should I make a similar change elsewhere?

Reviewer: _replacing_ requires a sentence before that: _Do X, replacing X by Y._ I don't find it very intuitive that a code snippet is supposed to represent this part of the sentence. The sentence before the code snippet is separated by a colon (:), so it can't take that role, either.

Besides, if an English sentence can be split up into two sentences, it's usually preferable to do so. English isn't meant to be used for complex sentences. It lacks the grammatical features of your and mine mother tongue :(

Reviewer: So yes, it would make sense to make similar changes elsewhere, but Roj and me are going to do a final pass over this and nitpick all the little style and language things, so we're gonna catch these cases anyway. You don't _have to_ fix them now.

Reviewer 2: I see. I wrote _replacing_ because that's how it was written in other articles about hosting.

  script:
    - rsync --delete -az src deno.jsonc deno.lock $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables/):

1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` - this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
2. `REMOTE_HOST` - the IP address of your server should be stored here
3. `REMOTE_USER` - the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

</CodeGroupItem>

> </CodeGroup>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</CodeGroup>

You should now see how every code push to the `main` branch will automatically be deployed to your VPS.
Development go brrrrr :rocket:
```

2. Open your new service file with an editor:

```sh
nano <app-name>.service
```

replacing `<app-name>` with any identifier.

> `<app-name>.service` will be the name of your service.

3. Add the following content:

```text
[Unit]
After=network.target
                                  
[Service]
Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>
ExecStart=<start-command>
Restart=on-failure

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

replacing `<token>` with your bot's token, `<launch-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command), and `<username>` with the name of the user on whose behalf the app is being started.

A small explanation of the service configuration:

> - `After=network.target` - indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.

Reviewer 2: Which option do you think is more appropriate? The Ukrainian translation will use `---`

> - `After=network.target` - indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.

Reviewer: I like that one best in English, to

- `WantedBy=multi-user.target` - defines the system state in which the service should be launched.
  `multi-user.target` - is a typical value for servers that defines the state of the system when everything works except the graphical interface, which simply does not exist.

> For more information on the unit files, read [this](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/configuring_basic_system_settings/assembly_working-with-systemd-unit-files_configuring-basic-system-settings).

4. Reload systemd whenever you edit the service:

```sh
systemctl daemon-reload
```

#### Managing the Service

```sh
# Replace `<service-name>` with the file name of the service you created.

# To start the service
systemctl start <service-name>

# To view the service logs
systemctl status <service-name>

# To restart the service
systemctl restart <service-name>

# To stop the service
systemctl stop <service-name>

# To enable the service to start when the server boots
systemctl enable <service-name>

# To disable service startup when the server boots
systemctl disable <service-name>
```

### PM2

> [PM2](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/) is a daemon process manager for Node.js that will help you manage and keep your app online 24/7.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[PM2](https://pm2.keymetrics.io) is a daemon process manager for Node.js that will help you manage and keep your app online 24/7.
```

Pay for the domain.

#### Domain Pointing to VPS

Before your domain can work with your VPS, you need to point the domain to your server.
To do this, in the [Hostinger Control Panel](https://hpanel.hostinger.com/), click the "Manage" button next to your domain.
Next, go to the DNS record management page by clicking on the "DNS / Name Servers" button in the menu on the left.

> First, find out the IP address of your VPS.

In the list of DNS records, find the record of type `A` with the name `@`.
Edit this record by changing the IP address in the "Points to" field to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

Next, find and delete the record of type `CNAME` with the name `www`.
Instead, create a new record of type `A` with the name `www`, pointing to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

> If you run into problems, use the other method described in [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).

### Setting up a Web Server

For the website to work and the bot to start receiving updates from Telegram, you need to set up a web server.

> We will use [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We will use [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com).
```

Caddy is a powerful open source web server with automatic HTTPS.

:::tip Web Server
We use Caddy because, unlike mainstream web servers like Nginx or Apache, it automatically configures SSL certificates.
This makes the article much easier.
However, you are free to choose any web server you want.
:::

#### Installation

The following 5 commands will download and automatically start Caddy as a systemd service called `caddy`.

```sh
apt install -y debian-keyring debian-archive-keyring apt-transport-https
curl -1sLf 'https://dl.cloudsmith.io/public/caddy/stable/gpg.key' | gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/caddy-stable-archive-keyring.gpg
curl -1sLf 'https://dl.cloudsmith.io/public/caddy/stable/debian.deb.txt' | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/caddy-stable.list
apt update
apt install caddy
```

Check the status of Caddy:

```sh
systemctl status caddy
```

:::details Troubleshooting

> Some hosting providers provide VPS with a pre-installed web server, for example, [Apache](https://httpd.apache.org/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some hosting providers provide VPS with a pre-installed web server, for example, [Apache](https://httpd.apache.org).
```

  # Enable the static file server.
  file_server

  # Another common task is to set up a reverse proxy:
  # reverse_proxy localhost:8080

  # Or serve a PHP site through php-fpm:
  # php_fastcgi localhost:9000
}

# Refer to the Caddy docs for more information:
# https://caddyserver.com/docs/caddyfile
```

For the bot to work, make the configuration look like this:

```text
<domain> {
  root * /usr/share/caddy
  file_server
  reverse_proxy /<token> localhost:8000
}
```

replacing `<domain>` with your domain and `<token>` with your bot token.

Reload Caddy every time as a site configuration file using the following command:

```sh
systemctl reload caddy
```

Now all requests to the address `https://<domain>/<token>` will be redirected to the address `http://localhost:8000/<token>`, where the bot's webhook is running.

#### Connecting a Webhook to Telegram

All you have to do is tell Telegram where to send the updates.
To do this, open your browser and visit the page at the following link:

```text
https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/setWebhook?url=https://<domain>/<token>
```

replacing `<token>` with your bot token and `<domain>` with your domain.

## CI/CD

> [CI/CD](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd/) is an important part of the modern software development process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[CI/CD](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd) is an important part of the modern software development process.
```

```yml
name: Main

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0
      - name: Deploy
        uses: easingthemes/ssh-deploy@v4
        env:
          SOURCE: "src deno.jsonc deno.lock"
          ARGS: "--delete -az"
          SSH_PRIVATE_KEY: ${{ secrets.SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
          REMOTE_HOST: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_HOST }}
          REMOTE_USER: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_USER }}
          TARGET: "<target-directory>"
          SCRIPT_AFTER: |
            cd <target-directory>
            <start-command>
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

> Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets/):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets):
```

  before_script:
    - "command -v ssh-agent >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install openssh-client -y )"
    - "command -v rsync >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install rsync -y )"
    - eval $(ssh-agent -s)
    - echo "$SSH_PRIVATE_KEY" | tr -d '\r' | ssh-add -
    - mkdir -p ~/.ssh
    - chmod 700 ~/.ssh
    - ssh-keyscan "$REMOTE_HOST" >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    - chmod 644 ~/.ssh/known_hosts
  script:
    - rsync --delete -az src deno.jsonc deno.lock $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

> Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables/):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables):
```

2. Open your new service file with an editor:

```sh
nano <app-name>.service
```

> Replace `<app-name>` with any identifier.

> `<app-name>.service` will be the name of your service.

3. Add the following content:

```text
[Unit]
After=network.target
                                  
[Service]
Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>
ExecStart=<start-command>
Restart=on-failure

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

> Replace `<token>` with your bot's token, `<launch-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command), and `<username>` with the name of the user on whose behalf the app is being started.

A small explanation of the service configuration:

> - `After=network.target` - indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.
> - `Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>` - sets the environment variable.
>   Add new `Environment` if you need multiple environment variables.
> - `ExecStart=<start-command>` - sets the startup command.
> - `Restart=on-failure` - indicates that the application should restart after a crash.
> - `WantedBy=multi-user.target` - defines the system state in which the service should be launched.
>   `multi-user.target` - is a typical value for servers that defines the state of the system when everything works except the graphical interface, which simply does not exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `After=network.target` --- indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.
- `Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>` --- sets the environment variable.
  Add new `Environment` if you need multiple environment variables.
- `ExecStart=<start-command>` --- sets the startup command.
- `Restart=on-failure` --- indicates that the application should restart after a crash.
- `WantedBy=multi-user.target` --- defines the system state in which the service should be launched.
  `multi-user.target` --- is a typical value for servers that defines the state of the system when everything works except the graphical interface, which simply does not exist.
```

pm2 reload <<app-name>>

# To stop the app
pm2 stop <<app-name>>

# To delete an app
pm2 delete <<app-name>>
```

#### Saving the Application Operation

If the server reboots, your bot will not resume working.
For the bot to resume work, you need to prepare PM2 for this.

On the server in the terminal, run the following command:

```sh
pm2 startup
```

You will be provided with a command that you must execute to make PM2 automatically start after the server reboots.

Then run one more command:

```sh
pm2 save
```

This command will save the list of current applications so that they can be launched after a server reboot.

If you have created a new application and want to save it as well, simply run `pm2 save` again.

## Running the Bot on Webhooks

To run a bot on webhooks, you will need to use a web framework and **NOT** call `bot.start()`.

Here is a sample code to run the bot on webhooks that should be added to the main bot file:

::: code-group

```ts [Node.js]
import { webhookCallback } from "grammy";
import { fastify } from "fastify";

const server = fastify();

server.post(`/${bot.token}`, webhookCallback(bot, "fastify"));

server.listen();
```

```ts [Deno]

> import { serve } from "https://deno.land/std/http/server.ts";

Reviewer: This part of std was discontinued. We need to switch to `Deno.serve`. However, given that this PQ has existed for such a long time already, we may want to fix this in a subsequent PQ. Another reason for doing this later is that we probably have to adjust several more places in the docs regarding this, so lets leave it for now.

Reviewer: #881 has changed my mind, we should fix it here

```text
<domain> {
  root * /usr/share/caddy
  file_server
  reverse_proxy /<token> localhost:8000
}
```

> Replace `<domain>` with your domain and `<token>` with your bot token.

Reload Caddy every time as a site configuration file using the following command:

```sh
systemctl reload caddy
```

Now all requests to the address `https://<domain>/<token>` will be redirected to the address `http://localhost:8000/<token>`, where the bot's webhook is running.

#### Connecting a Webhook to Telegram

All you have to do is tell Telegram where to send the updates.
To do this, open your browser and visit the page at the following link:

```text
https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/setWebhook?url=https://<domain>/<token>
```

> Replace `<token>` with your bot token and `<domain>` with your domain.

## CI/CD

[CI/CD](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd) is an important part of the modern software development process.
This guide covers almost all of the [CI/CD pipeline](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd/cicd-pipeline).

We will focus on writing scripts for GitHub and GitLab.
You can easily adapt the examples below to your CI/CD service of choice, such as Jenkins, Buddy, etc., if needed.

> :::tip Self-hosted runner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip Self-hosted Runner
```

:::

### SSH Keys

To deliver files to the server, you need to set up passwordless authentication, which is implemented using SSH keys.

The following commands should be run on your personal computer.

Change to the directory with the SSH keys:

```sh
cd ~/.ssh
```

Generate a new key pair:

::: code-group

```sh [GitHub]
ssh-keygen -t rsa -m PEM
```

```sh [GitLab]
ssh-keygen -t ed25519
```

:::

This command will generate a public and private key of the type and format you want for GitHub and GitLab.
You can also specify a custom key name if you wish.
Note that you should skip the fingerprint generation step (just press `Enter`).

Next, send the **public** key to the server:

```sh
ssh-copy-id -i <key-name>.pub root@<ip-address>
```

> Replace `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.

Note that the **public** key can be located on many servers, and the **private** key should be only with you and GitHub or GitLab.

You can now connect to the server without having to enter a password.

### Example Scripts

#### Node.js (GitHub)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use

```
is necessary because otherwise we have half a sentence with no beginning after the code area

```yml
name: Main

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0
      - uses: actions/setup-node@v3
        with:
          node-version: 'latest'
      - run: npm ci
      - name: Build
        run: npm run build
      - uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: source
          path: |
            dist/*.js
            package.json
            package-lock.json
  deploy:
    needs: build
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/download-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: source
          path: dist/
      - name: Deploy
        uses: easingthemes/ssh-deploy@v4
        env:
          SOURCE: "dist package.json package-lock.json"
          ARGS: "--delete -az"
          SSH_PRIVATE_KEY: ${{ secrets.SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
          REMOTE_HOST: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_HOST }}
          REMOTE_USER: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_USER }}
          TARGET: "<target-directory>"
          SCRIPT_AFTER: |
            cd <target-directory>
            npm i --omit=dev
            <start-command>
```

> where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.
```

This script sequentially performs two tasks: `build` and `deploy`.
After `build` is executed, the artifact of this task, namely the `dist` directory containing the bot build, is passed to the `deploy` task.

Files are delivered to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot directory, where we install all the dependencies except `devDependencies`, and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets):

> 1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` - this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
> 2. `REMOTE_HOST` - the IP address of your server should be stored here
> 3. `REMOTE_USER` - the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here
3. `REMOTE_USER`---the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.
```

#### Node.js (GitLab)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use

```

```yml
image: node:latest

stages:
  - build
  - deploy

Build:
  stage: build
  before_script: npm ci
  script: npm run build
  artifacts:
    paths:
      - dist/

Deploy:
  stage: deploy
  before_script:
    - "command -v ssh-agent >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install openssh-client -y )"
    - "command -v rsync >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install rsync -y )"
    - eval $(ssh-agent -s)
    - echo "$SSH_PRIVATE_KEY" | tr -d '\r' | ssh-add -
    - mkdir -p ~/.ssh
    - chmod 700 ~/.ssh
    - ssh-keyscan "$REMOTE_HOST" >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    - chmod 644 ~/.ssh/known_hosts
  script:
    - rsync --delete -az dist package.json package-lock.json $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

> where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.
```

This script sequentially performs two tasks: `build` and `deploy`.
After `build` is executed, the artifact of this task, namely the `dist` directory containing the bot build, is passed to the `deploy` task.

The files are delivered to the server using the `rsync` utility, which we must install before executing the main script.
After the files are delivered, we connect to the server using SSH to run a command to install all dependencies except `devDependencies` and restart the application.

Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables):

> 1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` - this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
> 2. `REMOTE_HOST` - the IP address of your server should be stored here
> 3. `REMOTE_USER` - the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here
3. `REMOTE_USER`---the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.
```

#### Deno (GitHub)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use

```

```yml
name: Main

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          fetch-depth: 0
      - name: Deploy
        uses: easingthemes/ssh-deploy@v4
        env:
          SOURCE: "src deno.jsonc deno.lock"
          ARGS: "--delete -az"
          SSH_PRIVATE_KEY: ${{ secrets.SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
          REMOTE_HOST: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_HOST }}
          REMOTE_USER: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_USER }}
          TARGET: "<target-directory>"
          SCRIPT_AFTER: |
            cd <target-directory>
            <start-command>
```

> where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.
```

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets):

> 1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` - this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
> 2. `REMOTE_HOST` - the IP address of your server should be stored here
> 3. `REMOTE_USER` - the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here
3. `REMOTE_USER`---the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.
```

#### Deno (GitLab)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use

```

```yml
image: denoland/deno:latest

stages:
  - deploy

Deploy:
  stage: deploy
  before_script:
    - "command -v ssh-agent >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install openssh-client -y )"
    - "command -v rsync >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install rsync -y )"
    - eval $(ssh-agent -s)
    - echo "$SSH_PRIVATE_KEY" | tr -d '\r' | ssh-add -
    - mkdir -p ~/.ssh
    - chmod 700 ~/.ssh
    - ssh-keyscan "$REMOTE_HOST" >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    - chmod 644 ~/.ssh/known_hosts
  script:
    - rsync --delete -az src deno.jsonc deno.lock $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

> where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.
```

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables):

> 1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY` - this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
> 2. `REMOTE_HOST` - the IP address of your server should be stored here
> 3. `REMOTE_USER` - the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here
3. `REMOTE_USER`---the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.
```

   - `ExecStart=<start-command>` --- sets the startup command.
   - `Restart=on-failure` --- indicates that the application should restart after a crash.
   - `WantedBy=multi-user.target` --- defines the system state in which the service should be launched.
     `multi-user.target` --- is a typical value for servers.

   > For more information on the unit files, read [this](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/te-in/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html/using_systemd_unit_files_to_customize_and_optimize_your_system/assembly_working-with-systemd-unit-files_working-with-systemd).

4. Reload systemd whenever you edit the service:

   ```sh
   systemctl daemon-reload
   ```

#### Managing the Service

```sh
# Replace `<service-name>` with the file name of the service you created.

# To start the service
systemctl start <service-name>

# To view the service logs
journalctl -u <service-name>

# To restart the service
systemctl restart <service-name>

# To stop the service
systemctl stop <service-name>

# To enable the service to start when the server boots
systemctl enable <service-name>

# To disable service startup when the server boots
systemctl disable <service-name>

> ```

Reviewer: Please remove the \ again

### PM2

[PM2](https://pm2.keymetrics.io) is a daemon process manager for Node.js that will help you manage and keep your app online 24/7.

> PM2 is designed specifically to manage applications written in Node.js.

> > However, it can also be used to manage applications written in other languages or runtimes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it can also be used to manage applications written in other languages or runtimes.
```

In the text input field, enter a domain name of the form `<name>.<zone>`.
For example, `example.com`.

If the desired domain is free, click the Add button next to it.
You will be automatically redirected to the checkout page, where you will also immediately register with Hostinger if you are not already registered.
Pay for the domain.

#### Domain Pointing to VPS

Before your domain can work with your VPS, you need to point the domain to your server.
To do this, in the [Hostinger Control Panel](https://hpanel.hostinger.com), click the "Manage" button next to your domain.
Next, go to the DNS record management page by clicking on the "DNS / Name Servers" button in the menu on the left.

> First, find out the IP address of your VPS.

In the list of DNS records, find the record of type `A` with the name `@`.
Edit this record by changing the IP address in the "Points to" field to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

Next, find and delete the record of type `CNAME` with the name `www`.
Instead, create a new record of type `A` with the name `www`, pointing to the IP address of your VPS, and set the TTL to 3600.

> > If you run into problems, use the other method described in [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you run into problems, use the other method described in the [knowledge base](https://support.hostinger.com/en/articles/1583227-how-to-point-domain-to-your-vps).
```

### Setting up a Web Server

For the website to work and the bot to start receiving updates from Telegram, you need to set up a web server.
We will use [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com).

Caddy is a powerful open source web server with automatic HTTPS.

::: tip Web Server
We use Caddy because, unlike mainstream web servers like Nginx or Apache, it automatically configures SSL certificates.
This makes the article much easier.
However, you are free to choose any web server you want.
:::

#### Installation

> The following 5 commands will download and automatically start Caddy as a systemd service called `caddy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following five commands will download and automatically start Caddy as a systemd service called `caddy`.
```

```sh
apt install -y debian-keyring debian-archive-keyring apt-transport-https curl
curl -1sLf 'https://dl.cloudsmith.io/public/caddy/stable/gpg.key' | gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/caddy-stable-archive-keyring.gpg
curl -1sLf 'https://dl.cloudsmith.io/public/caddy/stable/debian.deb.txt' | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/caddy-stable.list
apt update
apt install caddy
```

> See the [Caddy installation guide](https://caddyserver.com/docs/install) for other installation options.

Check the status of Caddy:

```sh
systemctl status caddy
```

::: details Troubleshooting
Some hosting providers provide VPS with a pre-installed web server, for example, [Apache](https://httpd.apache.org).
Multiple web servers cannot run on the same machine at the same time.
For Caddy to work, you need to stop and shut down another web server:

```sh
systemctl stop <service-name>
systemctl disable <service-name>
```

> > Replace `service-name` with the name of the web server service that is interfering with Caddy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `service-name` with the name of the web server service that is interfering with Caddy.
```

#### Configuring

In order for Caddy to process requests coming to our domain, we need to change the Caddy configuration.

Run the following command to open the Caddy configuration file:

```sh
nano /etc/caddy/Caddyfile
```

You will see the following default configuration:

```text
# The Caddyfile is an easy way to configure your Caddy web server.
#
# Unless the file starts with a global options block, the first
# uncommented line is always the address of your site.
#
# To use your own domain name (with automatic HTTPS), first make
# sure your domain's A/AAAA DNS records are properly pointed to
# this machine's public IP, then replace ":80" below with your
# domain name.

:80 {
  # Set this path to your site's directory.
  root * /usr/share/caddy

  # Enable the static file server.
  file_server

  # Another common task is to set up a reverse proxy:
  # reverse_proxy localhost:8080

  # Or serve a PHP site through php-fpm:
  # php_fastcgi localhost:9000
}

# Refer to the Caddy docs for more information:
# https://caddyserver.com/docs/caddyfile
```

For the bot to work, make the configuration look like this:

```text
<domain> {
  reverse_proxy /<token> localhost:<port>
}
```

> > Replace `<domain>` with your domain, `<token>` with your bot token, and `<port>` with the port on which you want to run your bot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<domain>` with your domain, `<token>` with your bot token, and `<port>` with the port on which you want to run your bot.
```

Reload Caddy every time you change the site's configuration file using the following command:

```sh
systemctl reload caddy
```

Now all requests to the address `https://<domain>/<token>` will be redirected to the address `http://localhost:<port>/<token>`, where the bot's webhook is running.

#### Connecting a Webhook to Telegram

All you have to do is tell Telegram where to send the updates.
To do this, open your browser and visit the page at the following link:

```text
https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/setWebhook?url=https://<domain>/<token>
```

> > Replace `<token>` with your bot token and `<domain>` with your domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<token>` with your bot token and `<domain>` with your domain.
```

## CI/CD

[CI/CD](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd) is an important part of the modern software development process.
This guide covers almost all of the [CI/CD pipeline](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd/cicd-pipeline).

We will focus on writing scripts for GitHub and GitLab.
You can easily adapt the examples below to your CI/CD service of choice, such as Jenkins, Buddy, etc., if needed.

:::tip Self-hosted Runner
GitHub and GitLab offer a certain amount of resources for free to complete your tasks.

> However, when setting up your pipeline, you may quickly use them all up, which will require you to pay money for additional resources or the tasks will not run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, when setting up your pipeline, you may quickly use up all of them, which will require you to pay money for additional resources or the tasks will not run.
```

> To prevent this from happening, we recommend installing a self-hosted runner on your server so that tasks run on your server.

Reviewer: Do we recommend that? I usually just open-source the bots, which gives you way more CI time than you need. Isn't that a better option? We can still recommend hosting your own runner if publishing the source is not an option, but doing this isn't exactly trivial, so I wouldn't blindly tell everyone to do it.

Author: Self-hosted runner has nothing to do with the openness of the bot's source code.

Author: In any case, we can leave a "hint" instead of a "recommendation" about the possibility of installing your own runner. For example, "to prevent this from happening, ~~we recommend to~~ **you can** install a self-hosted runner on the server".

Author: Self-hosted runners do not have the same restrictions as official runners. Self-hosted runners can also be used for closed projects. The main thing is to have enough resources on the server to support your own runner.

Reviewer: I know. The point was this:

Problem: not enough CI resources on your private project
Solution 1: make it public
Solution 2: host a runner

Solution 1 is much easier, yet we currently recommend solution 2.

Author: No. In my opinion, the reason and solution are as follows:
Reason: the free plan of the official CI/CD is not enough for large projects or even for small ones if the user is experimenting with CI/CD for the first time and performing a lot of pipelines in a short time.
Solution 1: pay for additional CI/CD resources, which can be very expensive, as in the case of cloud hosting.
Solution 2: Install your own runner on the server to be limited only by the capacity of your own server, which can be upgraded at any time. (In fact, even self-hosted runners have limitations, but they are much smaller then free ones). In this case, it doesn't matter if the bot's source code is open source; no additional restrictions will be imposed. And there is no point in opening access to your own runner either.

This way, you'll get rid of the limits and be able to run pipelines of any complexity (everything will depend only on the capacity of your server).
:::

### SSH Keys

To deliver files to the server, you need to set up passwordless authentication, which is implemented using SSH keys.

The following commands should be run on your personal computer.

Change to the directory with the SSH keys:

```sh
cd ~/.ssh
```

Generate a new key pair:

::: code-group

```sh [GitHub]
ssh-keygen -t rsa -m PEM
```

```sh [GitLab]
ssh-keygen -t ed25519
```

:::

This command will generate a public and private key of the type and format you want for GitHub and GitLab.
You can also specify a custom key name if you wish.

Next, send the **public** key to the server:

```sh
ssh-copy-id -i <key-name>.pub root@<ip-address>
```

> > Replace `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.
```

2. Open your new service file with an editor:

   ```sh
   nano <app-name>.service
   ```

   > Replace `<app-name>` with any identifier.
   > `<app-name>.service` will be the name of your service.

3. Add the following content:

   ```text
   [Unit]
   After=network.target

   [Service]
   Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>
   ExecStart=<start-command>
   Restart=on-failure

   [Install]
   WantedBy=multi-user.target
   ```

>    > Replace `<token>` with your bot's token, `<start-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command), and `<username>` with the name of the user on whose behalf the app is being started.

Author: ```suggestion
   > Replace `<token>` with your bot's token, `<start-command>` with the command you received [above](#getting-the-start-command).
```

The service configuration no longer mentions the username

>    A small explanation of the service configuration:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   Here is a brief explanation of the service configuration:
```

   - `After=network.target` --- indicates that the application should be launched after the Internet module is loaded.

>    - `Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>` --- sets the environment variable.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   - `Environment=BOT_TOKEN=<token>` --- sets the environment variable `BOT_TOKEN`.
```

>      Add new `Environment` if you need multiple environment variables.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
     Add other `Environment` entries if you need multiple environment variables.
```

1. Use the command line interface.
2. Use the [configuration file](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/application-declaration).

The first method is convenient when getting to know PM2.
However, during deployment, you should use the second method, which is what we did in our case.

On our server, in the directory where the bot assembly is stored, there is a file `ecosystem.config.js` with the following contents:

```js
module.exports = {
  apps: [{
    name: "<app-name>",
    script: "<start-command>",
  }],
};
```

where `<app-name>` can be any identifier, and `<start command>` must be the actual command to start the bot, for example, `node bot.js` or `npm run start`, etc.

#### Managing the Application

Below are the commands you can use to control the application.

```sh
# If the `ecosystem.config.js` file is in the current directory,
# you can specify nothing to start the application.
# If the application is already running, this command will restart it.
pm2 start

# All of the following commands require you to specify the name of the application
# or the `ecosystem.config.js` file.
# To apply the action to all applications, specify `all`.

# To restart the app

> pm2 restart <<app-name>>
> 
> # To reload the app
> pm2 reload <<app-name>>
> 
> # To stop the app
> pm2 stop <<app-name>>
> 
> # To delete an app
> pm2 delete <<app-name>>

Author: ```suggestion
pm2 restart <app-name>

# To reload the app
pm2 reload <app-name>

# To stop the app
pm2 stop <app-name>

# To delete an app
pm2 delete <app-name>
```

This way, you'll get rid of the limits and be able to run pipelines of any complexity and capacity (almost).
:::

### SSH Keys

To deliver files to the server, you need to set up passwordless authentication, which is implemented using SSH keys.

The following commands should be run on your personal computer.

Change to the directory with the SSH keys:

```sh
cd ~/.ssh
```

Generate a new key pair:

::: code-group

```sh [GitHub]
ssh-keygen -t rsa -m PEM
```

```sh [GitLab]
ssh-keygen -t ed25519
```

:::

This command will generate a public and private key of the type and format you want for GitHub and GitLab.
You can also specify a custom key name if you wish.
Note that you should skip the fingerprint generation step (just press `Enter`).

Next, send the **public** key to the server:

```sh
ssh-copy-id -i <key-name>.pub root@<ip-address>
```

> Replace `<key-name>` with the name of the generated key and `<ip-address>` with the IP address of your server.

Note that the **public** key can be located on many servers, and the **private** key should be only with you and GitHub or GitLab.

You can now connect to the server without having to enter a password.

> ### Example Scripts

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Example Workflows
```

            cd <target-directory>
            npm i --omit=dev
            <start-command>
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.

This script sequentially performs two tasks: `build` and `deploy`.
After `build` is executed, the artifact of this task, namely the `dist` directory containing the bot build, is passed to the `deploy` task.

Files are delivered to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot directory, where we install all the dependencies except `devDependencies`, and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets):

1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.

> 2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here

Author: ```suggestion
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here.
```

  script:
    - rsync --delete -az dist package.json package-lock.json $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.

This script sequentially performs two tasks: `build` and `deploy`.
After `build` is executed, the artifact of this task, namely the `dist` directory containing the bot build, is passed to the `deploy` task.

The files are delivered to the server using the `rsync` utility, which we must install before executing the main script.
After the files are delivered, we connect to the server using SSH to run a command to install all dependencies except `devDependencies` and restart the application.

Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables):

1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.

> 2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here

Author: ```suggestion
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here.
```

        env:
          SOURCE: "src deno.jsonc deno.lock"
          ARGS: "--delete -az"
          SSH_PRIVATE_KEY: ${{ secrets.SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
          REMOTE_HOST: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_HOST }}
          REMOTE_USER: ${{ secrets.REMOTE_USER }}
          TARGET: "<target-directory>"
          SCRIPT_AFTER: |
            cd <target-directory>
            <start-command>
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.

This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.
After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

Note that you need to add three [secret environment variables](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets):

1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.

> 2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here

Author: ```suggestion
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here.
```

3. `REMOTE_USER`---the name of the user on whose behalf the bot is launched should be stored here.

#### Deno (GitLab)

Use

```yml
image: denoland/deno:latest

stages:
  - deploy

Deploy:
  stage: deploy
  before_script:
    - "command -v ssh-agent >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install openssh-client -y )"
    - "command -v rsync >/dev/null || ( apt-get update -y && apt-get install rsync -y )"
    - eval $(ssh-agent -s)
    - echo "$SSH_PRIVATE_KEY" | tr -d '\r' | ssh-add -
    - mkdir -p ~/.ssh
    - chmod 700 ~/.ssh
    - ssh-keyscan "$REMOTE_HOST" >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    - chmod 644 ~/.ssh/known_hosts
  script:
    - rsync --delete -az src deno.jsonc deno.lock $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST:<target-directory>
    - ssh $REMOTE_USER@$REMOTE_HOST "cd <target-directory> && npm i --omit=dev && <start-command>"
```

where `<target-directory>` is replaced with the name of the directory where the bot build is stored on the server, and `<start-command>` with the command to start your bot, which can for example be a call to `pm2` or `systemctl`.

> This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which is implemented by `easingthemes/ssh-deploy`.

Author: ```suggestion
This script sends files to the server using the `rsync` utility, which we must install before executing the main script.
```

Author: @roj1512 There is one last fix left. Have you seen it yet?

> After the files are delivered to the server, the command described in the `SCRIPT_AFTER` environment variable is executed.
> In our case, after the files are delivered, we go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.

Author: ```suggestion
After the files are delivered, we connect to the server using SSH to go to the bot's directory and restart the bot.
```

Note that you need to add three [environment variables](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/variables):

1. `SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`---this is where the private SSH key you created in the [previous step](#ssh-keys) should be stored.

> 2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here

Author: ```suggestion
2. `REMOTE_HOST`---the IP address of your server should be stored here.
```

}
```

> Replace `<domain>` with your domain, `<token>` with your bot token, and `<port>` with the port on which you want to run your bot.

Reload Caddy every time you change the site's configuration file using the following command:

```sh
systemctl reload caddy
```

Now all requests to the address `https://<domain>/<token>` will be redirected to the address `http://localhost:<port>/<token>`, where the bot's webhook is running.

#### Connecting a Webhook to Telegram

All you have to do is tell Telegram where to send the updates.
To do this, open your browser and visit the page at the following link:

```text
https://api.telegram.org/bot<token>/setWebhook?url=https://<domain>/<token>
```

> Replace `<token>` with your bot token and `<domain>` with your domain.

## CI/CD

[CI/CD](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd) is an important part of the modern software development process.
This guide covers almost all of the [CI/CD pipeline](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/ci-cd/cicd-pipeline).

We will focus on writing scripts for GitHub and GitLab.
You can easily adapt the examples below to your CI/CD service of choice, such as Jenkins, Buddy, etc., if needed.

> 
> :::tip Self-hosted Runner
> GitHub and GitLab offer a certain amount of resources for free to complete your tasks.
> However, when setting up your pipeline, you may quickly use them all up, which will require you to pay money for additional resources or the tasks will not run.
> To prevent this from happening, we recommend installing a self-hosted runner on your server so that tasks run on your server.
> This way, you'll get rid of the limits and be able to run pipelines of any complexity (everything will depend only on the capacity of your server).
> :::

Reviewer: @niusia-ua we can also just remove it entirely. The guide is good enough to make a first iteration work. That is the most important thing.
```suggestion
```
I assume that many people won't even have this problem in the first days of development, and they can always fix things later.

Author: Okay, this is an acceptable decision
